PEP 803: Stable ABI for Free-Threaded Builds (#4556)
python/peps: peps/pep-0803.rst

PEP: 803
Title: Stable ABI for Free-Threaded Builds
Author: Petr Viktorin <encukou@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Requires: 703, 793, 697
Created: 08-Aug-2025
Python-Version: 3.15

Abstract
========

Stable ABI 3.15 will be compatible with both free-threaded and GIL-enabled
builds.
To allow this, the ``PyObject`` internal structure and related APIs
will be removed from the Limited API, requiring migration to new API
for common tasks like defining modules and most classes.

Terminology
===========

> This PEP uses “GIL-enabled build” as antonym to “free-threaded build”,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PEP uses “GIL-enabled build” as an antonym to “free-threaded build”,
```

that is, an interpreter or extension built without ``Py_GIL_DISABLED``.

Motivation
==========

In its `acceptance post <https://discuss.python.org/t/84319/123>`__
for :pep:`779`, the Steering Council stated that it “expects that Stable ABI
for free-threading should be prepared and defined for Python 3.15”.

> This PEP proposes how to do this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PEP proposes the Stable ABI for free-threading.
```

Background
----------

Python's Stable ABI, as defined in :pep:`384` and :pep:`652`, provides a way to
compile extension modules that can be loaded on multiple versions of the
CPython interpreter.
Several projects use this to limit the number of *wheels* (binary artefacts)
that need to be built and distributed for each release, and/or to make it
possible to test with pre-release versions of Python.

With free-threading builds (:pep:`703`) being on track to eventually become
the default (:pep:`779`), we need a way to make the Stable ABI available
to those builds.

To build against the Stable ABI, the extension must use a *Limited API*,
that is, only a subset of the functions, structures, etc. that CPython
exposes.

> The limited API is versioned, and building against Limited API 3.X

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Limited API is versioned, and building against Limited API 3.X
```

> yields an extension that is ABI-compatible with CPython 3.X *and above* (modulo

Reviewer: Not sure what "modulo bugs" means in this sentence.

bugs in CPython).

> Also, the Limited API is not “stable”: its newer versions may remove API that
> was part of its older versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, the Limited API is not “stable”: newer versions may remove API that
were a part of older versions.
```

> This PEP proposes the largest such removal to date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PEP proposes the most significant such removal to date.
```

Rationale
=========

The design in this PEP makes several assumptions:

One ABI
   A single compiled extension module should support both
   free-threaded and GIL-enabled builds.

No backwards compatibility

>    The new limited API does not need to support CPython 3.14 and below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The new limited API will not support CPython 3.14 and below.
```

>    Projects that need this can build separate extensions specifically for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Projects that need this support can build separate extensions specifically for
```

   the 3.14 free-threaded interpreter, and for older stable ABI versions.

> API changes are OK

Reviewer: This is a bit vague. Perhaps "Extension authors may need to change their code."

Reviewer 2: I think I agree the heading could be more descriptive here, but I don't have a sufficiently snappy phrase springing to mind.

   The new Limited API may require extension authors to make significant
   changes to their code.
   Projects that cannot do this (yet) can continue using Limited API 3.14,
   which will yield extensions compatible with GIL-enabled builds only.

No extra configuration
   We do not introduce new “knobs” that influence what API is available
   and what the ABI is compatible with.

Specification
=============

Opaque PyObject
---------------

Version 3.15 of the Limited API will:

- make the following structures *opaque* (or in C terminology, *incomplete
  types*):

  - :c:type:`PyObject`
  - :c:type:`PyVarObject`
  - :c:type:`!PyModuleDef_Base`
  - :c:type:`PyModuleDef`

> - no longer include the following macros:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- exclude the following macros:
```

Reviewer 2: I think either wording works, but Petr's rationale makes sense for the current phrasing.

  - :c:macro:`PyObject_HEAD`
  - :c:macro:`!_PyObject_EXTRA_INIT`
  - :c:macro:`PyObject_HEAD_INIT`
  - :c:macro:`PyObject_VAR_HEAD`

> - no longer include these function-like macros:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- exclude these function-like macros:
```

  - :c:func:`Py_SIZE`
  - :c:func:`Py_SET_SIZE`
  - :c:func:`Py_SET_TYPE`

Implications
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Making the ``PyObject``, ``PyVarObject`` and ``PyModuleDef`` structures
opaque means:

- Their fields may not be accessed.

  For example, instead of ``o->ob_type``, extensions must use
  ``Py_TYPE(o)``.

>   This usage has long been preferred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This usage has been the preferred practice for some time.
```

PEP: 803
Title: Stable ABI for Free-Threaded Builds
Author: Petr Viktorin <encukou@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Requires: 703, 793, 697
Created: 08-Aug-2025
Python-Version: 3.15

Abstract
========

> Stable ABI 3.15 will be compatible with both free-threaded and GIL-enabled
> builds.

Author: ```suggestion
Version 3.15 of the Stable ABI will be compatible with both free-threaded and
GIL-enabled builds.
```

To allow this, the ``PyObject`` internal structure and related APIs

> will be removed from the Limited API, requiring migration to new API

Author: ```suggestion
will be removed from version 3.15 of the Limited API, requiring migration to new API
```

for common tasks like defining modules and most classes.

Terminology

> ===========

Author: I've seen “traditional builds” as well. I don't think there's a standard term, that's why I added the section.
My objection to “with-GIL” is that free-threading builds also have a GIL; the difference is that it can be disabled (and is, by default).

> This PEP uses “GIL-enabled build” as an antonym to “free-threaded build”,

Author: There are more things that searching harder, like number of spaces after a period, or hard line wrapping. I prefer keeping the source easier to read.

that is, an interpreter or extension built without ``Py_GIL_DISABLED``.

Motivation
==========

> In its `acceptance post <https://discuss.python.org/t/84319/123>`__
> for :pep:`779`, the Steering Council stated that it “expects that Stable ABI
> for free-threading should be prepared and defined for Python 3.15”.
> 
> This PEP proposes the Stable ABI for free-threading.

Author: ```suggestion
The Stable ABI is currently not available for free-threaded builds.
Extensions will fail to build when :c:macro:`Py_LIMITED_API` is defined,
and extensions built for GIL-enabled builds of CPython will fail to load (or crash)
on free-threaded builds.

In its `acceptance post <https://discuss.python.org/t/84319/123>`__
for :pep:`779`, the Steering Council stated that it “expects that Stable ABI
for free-threading should be prepared and defined for Python 3.15”.

This PEP proposes the Stable ABI for free-threading.
```

Background
----------

Python's Stable ABI, as defined in :pep:`384` and :pep:`652`, provides a way to
compile extension modules that can be loaded on multiple versions of the

> CPython interpreter.

Author: Micro & Serial versions too. Are there any others? :P

More seriously, I'd like to avoid implying that Python 4.0, if we ever do release it, *will* break the stable ABI. It might, it might not -- there are no plans for it. 
(Except we *do* want to make things flexible enough to withstand major shifts.)

> CPython interpreter.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps "major or minor"? My intent was to clarify that this isn't just patch versions, where there is generally an expectation of ABI stability regardless.

> CPython interpreter.

Author: I'll add “minor” then. Adding ”minor or patch or serial”, or “all kinds of version numbers we change”, would make this too long.

> Several projects use this to limit the number of *wheels* (binary artefacts)

Author: ```suggestion
Several projects use this to limit the number of :ref:`wheels <packaging:binary-distribution-format>` (binary artefacts)
```

that need to be built and distributed for each release, and/or to make it
possible to test with pre-release versions of Python.

With free-threading builds (:pep:`703`) being on track to eventually become
the default (:pep:`779`), we need a way to make the Stable ABI available
to those builds.

To build against the Stable ABI, the extension must use a *Limited API*,
that is, only a subset of the functions, structures, etc. that CPython
exposes.
The Limited API is versioned, and building against Limited API 3.X
yields an extension that is ABI-compatible with CPython 3.X and *any* later
version (though bugs in CPython sometimes cause incompatibilities in practice).
Also, the Limited API is not “stable”: newer versions may remove API that
were a part of older versions.

This PEP proposes the most significant such removal to date.

Rationale
=========

The design in this PEP makes several assumptions:

> One ABI

Reviewer 2: This section is formatted as a definition list, is this intentional?

Author: Yes.

   A single compiled extension module should support both
   free-threaded and GIL-enabled builds.

No backwards compatibility
   The new limited API will not support CPython 3.14 and below.
   Projects that need this support can build separate extensions specifically for
   the 3.14 free-threaded interpreter, and for older stable ABI versions.

API changes are OK
   The new Limited API may require extension authors to make significant
   changes to their code.
   Projects that cannot do this (yet) can continue using Limited API 3.14,

>    which will yield extensions compatible with GIL-enabled builds only.

Reviewer 2: Is the "yet" here implying that they are envisaged as not able to migrate due to lack of manpower, or due to technical constraints (e.g. removed API with no replacement). If the former, and just resource constraints, I think that's less concerning, but it could be useful to make this clearer.

Author: I think it'll always be a mix of both -- there'll always be things CPython can make easier.
As for *hard* technical constraints, I know some possible cases but I consider them pretty remote. 
This PEP is rather open-ended, too (maybe the “New API” section shouldn't be worded so exclusively... but then again, we can *always* add new API).

Author: I'm actually fine with that implication :)
If that worries you as a reader, they you should definitely read the details in the PEP, and discuss your use case. Otherwise, we might discover and solve it in some later version.

No extra configuration
   We do not introduce new “knobs” that influence what API is available
   and what the ABI is compatible with.

Specification
=============

Opaque PyObject
---------------

Version 3.15 of the Limited API will:

- make the following structures *opaque* (or in C terminology, *incomplete
  types*):

  - :c:type:`PyObject`
  - :c:type:`PyVarObject`
  - :c:type:`!PyModuleDef_Base`
  - :c:type:`PyModuleDef`

- no longer include the following macros:

  - :c:macro:`PyObject_HEAD`
  - :c:macro:`!_PyObject_EXTRA_INIT`
  - :c:macro:`PyObject_HEAD_INIT`
  - :c:macro:`PyObject_VAR_HEAD`

- no longer include these function-like macros:

  - :c:func:`Py_SIZE`
  - :c:func:`Py_SET_SIZE`
  - :c:func:`Py_SET_TYPE`

Implications
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Making the ``PyObject``, ``PyVarObject`` and ``PyModuleDef`` structures
opaque means:

> - Their fields may not be accessed.

Reviewer 2: As in the next para, we provide macros to access data in the structs, just via a level of indirection.
```suggestion
- Their fields may not be directly accessed.
```

  For example, instead of ``o->ob_type``, extensions must use
  ``Py_TYPE(o)``.
  This usage has been the preferred practice for some time.

- Their size and alignment will not be available.
  Expressions such as ``sizeof(PyObject)`` will no longer work.

- They cannot be embedded in other structures.
  This mainly affects instance structs of extension-defined types,
  which will need to be defined using API added in :pep:`697` -- that is,
  using a ``struct`` *without* ``PyObject`` (or other base class struct) at
  the beginning, with :c:func:`PyObject_GetTypeData` calls needed to access
  the memory.

- Variables of these types cannot be created.
  This mainly affects static ``PyModuleDef`` variables needed to define
  extension modules.
  Extensions will need to switch to API added in :pep:`793`.

The following functions will become unusable in practice (in the new Limited
API), since an extension cannot create valid, statically allocated, input

> for them. To ease the transition for extension developers, they will not yet be removed from the Limited API:

Reviewer 2: line length (please stick to 79)

Author: ```suggestion
for them. To ease the transition for extension developers,
they will not yet be removed from the Limited API:
```

- :c:func:`PyModuleDef_Init`
- :c:func:`PyModule_Create`, :c:func:`PyModule_Create2`
- :c:func:`PyModule_FromDefAndSpec`, :c:func:`PyModule_FromDefAndSpec2`

> New Export Hook (PEP 793)
> -------------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
New Export Hook (:pep:`793`)
----------------------------
```

Reviewer 2: I'll look into this, perhaps a recent Docutils change.

Implementation of this PEP requires :pep:`793` (``PyModExport``:
A new entry  point for C extension modules) to be
accepted, providing a new “export hook” for defining extension modules.

> Using the new hook will become mandatory in Limited API 3.15.

Reviewer 2: PEP 793 hasn't been accepted as at the time of writing. Would accepting this PEP require the SC to also accept 793?

Author: Yes. It's listed in the Requires header.

Runtime ABI checks
------------------

Users -- or rather the tools they use for building and installing extensions --
will continue to be responsible for not putting incompatible extensions on
Python's import paths.
This decision makes sense since tools typically have much richer metadata than what CPython
can check.

However, CPython will add a line of defense against outdated or misconfigured
tools, or human mistakes, in the form of a new *module slot* containing
basic ABI information.
This information will be checked when a module is loaded, and incompatible
extensions will be rejected.
The specifics are left to the C API working group
(see `issue 72 <https://github.com/capi-workgroup/decisions/issues/72>`__).

This slot will become *mandatory* with the new export hook added in
:pep:`793`.

> (The PEP currently says “there are no required slots”; it will be updated.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(That PEP currently says “there are no required slots”; it will be updated.)
```

can be successfully loaded on free-threaded Python, but not necessarily ones
that are thread-safe without a GIL.

Limited API to allow thread-safety without a GIL -- presumably ``PyMutex``, ``PyCriticalSection``, and
similar -- will be added via the C API working group, or in a follow-up PEP.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Limited API 3.15 will not be backwards-compatible with older CPython releases,
due to removed structs and functions.

Extension authors who cannot switch may continue to use Limited API 3.14
and below.
For compatibility with free-threaded builds, they can compile using
version-specific ABI -- for example, compile on CPython 3.15 without defining
``Py_LIMITED_API``.

Security Implications
=====================

None known.

How to Teach This
=================

A porting guide will need to explain how to move to APIs added in
:pep:`697` (Limited C API for Extending Opaque Types)
and :pep:`793` (``PyModExport``).

Reference Implementation
========================

This PEP combines several pieces, implemented individually:

- Opaque ``PyObject`` is available in CPython main branch after defining the
  ``_Py_OPAQUE_PYOBJECT`` macro.

>   Implemented in GitHub pull request `#136505 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/136505>`__.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Implemented in GitHub pull request `python/cpython#136505
  <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/136505>`__.
```

- For ``PyModExport``, see :pep:`793`.

> - For a version-checking slot, see GitHub pull request `#137212 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/137212>`__.
> - For a check for older ``abi3``, see GitHub pull request `#137957 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/137957>`__.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For a version-checking slot, see GitHub pull request `python/cpython#137212
  <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/137212>`__.
- For a check for older ``abi3``, see GitHub pull request `python/cpython#137957
  <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/137957>`__.
```
